With its technical and operational superiority in 5G mobile networks (the vital infrastructure for technologies like A.I. and the Internet of Things), Huawei might be an avatar for China itself: ambitious, future-focused, and a serious threat to U.S. exceptionalism. The deluge of American complaints about Huawei being a national security risk (due to its links to the Chinese state) should be recognized for what it is: cover for the United States to engage in economic warfare, throwing its significant weight around to help ensure Huawei is blacklisted across the globe.
The desperation of the U.S. efforts reflects a cold truth about the international competition in technology, and A.I. in particular: China is opening up a lead. Following their public commitment in 2017 to develop world leadership in A.I. by 2030, China has backed up its strategy with several billion dollars’ worth of funding and a cohesive bureaucratic effort to manage the plan’s execution. This outpouring of investment is already bearing tangible fruit, from cutting-edge computer vision technology to new kinds of autonomous drone swarms.
With the benefit of a command-and-control economy, China has created an environment tailored to provide as few barriers possible to technology companies. Rules like data privacy and antitrust are only selectively enforced by the state; as with many things in China, there is one rule for friends of the Party and another for the rest. This is all bright news for China’s champions of A.I. development: Baidu, Tencent, and Alibaba. Not only do they enjoy the fruits of the investment tethered to the Chinese 2030 strategy, but they are also able to develop their technology without scrutiny from a hostile media.
Just two years since that 2017 announcement, a wide range of indicators herald the success of China’s efforts so far. PwC has predicted that A.I. will account for a $16 trillion boost to the global economy by 2030, with almost half of that coming from the Chinese economy — worth a staggering 26% boost to the Chinese GDP. In the private sector last year, Chinese firms attracted more VC funding than American funds for the first time ever. A majority of the world’s unicorns (startups worth more than $1 billion) now come from China, which has 14 A.I. unicorns building everything from autonomous vehicles and smart city technology to drones and health care technology.
There is another element to the explosive growth of Chinese A.I. technology: the sheer amount of data generated by China’s 1.4 billion citizens. Data is food for A.I. systems. A.I. extract patterns from pools of data, and more data means more accuracy and efficiency. Luckily for China’s nascent A.I. industry, there is no place on the planet with as much data as China. Aside from the size of the population, over half of all people living in China access the internet regularly via smartphones. Smartphones produce much more data than desktop computers, due to the number of sensors they have and how their owners tend to carry them around all day.
With support from the state to the tune of over $50 billion, a purposefully impotent regulatory regime, and the sheer quantity of available data, it’s easy to see how the growth of Chinese A.I. has been so meteoric.
What about Google?
On the other hand, Google and its mother company Alphabet can boast strong evidence that Silicon Valley retains the world’s foremost A.I. Just last month, it published a study in the journal Nature touting results of an A.I. system that can reportedly detect signs of acute kidney disease 48 hours before human doctors. Through its autonomous driving arm, Waymo, Google has a credible claim to the world’s most advanced driverless cars. In Seattle, Amazon has carved out superiority in retail A.I. with Amazon Go, its ambitious plan for autonomous stores (the company is targeting 3,000 openings in the next two years).
The world’s biggest technology companies (Amazon, Alphabet, Apple) are all from the United States, and all boast cutting-edge A.I. Of course, the United States also has an advantage in the education sector, with most of the world’s top universities for computer science. It’s likely that a research team at Stanford, or at Alphabet, will be the first with a seismic breakthrough towards something like artificial general intelligence (human-level intelligence that is broad and adaptable).
However, for all of Silicon Valley’s technological pre-eminence to date, the technology giants face mounting challenges tied to the grim outlook for technology policy over the next few years. The United States is embroiled in political gridlock. Congress has stalled entirely under both President Trump and President Obama before him, with parties ostensibly in power unable to pass most of their legislating agenda. Even then, A.I. is hardly a political priority for either party. The only political candidate really stressing the need for the US to have a dedicated plan for A.I. is the lonely figure of Andrew Yang.
The contrast with China, a country putting much of its considerable resources behind a national A.I. strategy, could not be more stark. And make no mistake: even though the United States is no state-controlled economy, the government plays an important role in managing the corporate environment that Google and Amazon have to navigate.
While Chinese technology champions benefit from their country’s patronage, the ones in the United States are under government attack. Trump’s tiffs with Amazon (over Jeff Bezos’ ownership of the Washington Post, a “Fake News” staple) and Google (over a perceived anti-conservative bias) have hammered the companies’ stock prices and forced them onto the defensive. The Republicans have certainly shredded regulations, which should suit the tech giants, but they have also slashed funding for research and development. The Department of Defense remains a large source of funding for innovation (this is, after all, the organization that invented the internet), but “only” for about $2 billion — far less than the $50 billion on offer to companies in China.
The election of a Democrat in November next year might make matters worse. The bookmaker’s favorite to be Democratic nominee, Elizabeth Warren, wants to break up Google, Amazon, and Facebook — making Trump’s attacks look insignificant by comparison, and potentially compromising those companies’ expensive A.I. research programs. In any scenario, it is difficult to see how the regulatory and political environment for U.S. technology companies will improve in the immediate future. By no means are Amazon and Google likely to implode anytime soon — but in a context of intense competition with dynamic Chinese companies, these challenges might be enough to see China take a decisive technological lead.
If China possesses the world’s best deep learning algorithms, we can expect those algorithms to absorb new information and grow at a faster rate over time than any other A.I.
Xi Jinping as President of A.I.
It really matters if the world’s leading A.I. comes out of computer labs in Shenzhen, rather than Silicon Valley. Particularly given the capabilities A.I. is expected to offer within the next few years, let alone decades, we should all be wary about what it would mean if Xi Jinping (now set to be president of China for life) had access to the best of this technology.
China is already deploying facial recognition A.I. to track Uighurs, a minority group of mostly Muslims facing persecution by the state. More advanced A.I. will only strengthen the country’s ability to enforce authoritarian control, likely with terrifying consequences for minority groups. A technological advantage in A.I. would create the risk of unstoppable cyber attacks — a taste of this was delivered recently by Chinese hackers, targeting U.S. financial services and utilities. More advanced A.I. would give China more capacity for censorship, amplify their naval power, and enable greater persecution of political dissidents.
Even worse, developing true A.I. supremacy might amount to a compounding advantage — the most advanced A.I. teaches itself through machine learning. If China possesses the world’s best deep learning algorithms, we can expect those algorithms to absorb new information and grow at a faster rate over time than any other A.I. The stakes could not be much higher. The fight over Huawei may prove to be an early sign of the technological fallout to come.